README.md, before:

# students-education-api

A coding challenge to model students, teachers, lessons and students completing lessons in parts.

## The challenge

### Coding Project

_Company X_ is developing a new app for student education. Students complete lessons and their progress is recorded.
Each lesson has 3 parts - 1, 2 and 3. There are 100 lessons in total.

#### Part 1

Generate a rails app that persists students and their progress.

Define routes for:

1.  setting a student's progress - progress should consist of a lesson and part number.
2.  returning a JSON representation of a student and their associated progress.

See the results in [USAGE.md](USAGE.md#part-1)

#### Part 2

Teachers have classes containing number of students.

1.  Add a teacher model that is related to students
2.  Create a reports page for a teacher to view progress all of their students.

See the results in [USAGE.md](USAGE.md#part-2)

#### Part 3

Calculating progress

1. add a method for updating student progress - this should verify that the student is only able to complete the next
   part number in sequence e.g.
   L1 P1, L1 P2, L1 P3, L2 P1, L2 P2 etc

#### Seeing the results - curl

There is an instance of this application running at
[https://students-education-api.herokuapp.com](https://students-education-api.herokuapp.com).
For a demonstration of the basics of the API, see: [USAGE.md](USAGE.md)

## Environment

### Ruby

2.3.1

### Rails

5.0.0.rc1

## Installation

Clone the repository, then install the gems it depends on:

    cd students-education-api
    bundle install

## Setup

This application is configured to use a _PostgreSQL_ database, ensure you have one running, then create and seed the
database:

    bundle exec rails db:setup

## Operation

### Running the app

    bundle exec rails s

### Testing the app

    bundle exec rails test

## Interpretation of the problem

From the problem description, it would seem obvious to model resources / tables for:
* Student
* Teacher
* SchoolClass (don't want trouble conflicting with Ruby's Class class, so prefix with _School_)
* Lesson
* LessonPart

And some relationships:
* `Teacher` has many `SchoolClass`
* `SchoolClass` has many `Student`
* `SchoolClass` has many `Lesson` (100 of them)
* `Lesson` has many `LessonPart` (3 of them)
* `Student` has many `LessonPart` (through `Completion`)
* `LessonPart` has many `Student` (through `Completion`)

For now, to keep things simple, I am going to assume that a student is only enrolled in a single class. This is area
for enhancement later on: an `Enrolment` model to join `Student` and `SchoolClass` (`has_many ... through:`).

A possible enhancement is to being `Student` and `Teacher` closer with single-table-inheritance to DRY up the
models/schema. Whether it's worth doing that is somewhat debatable. It depends on how many common attributes and
much common behaviour the two models end up having.

To track student's progress there will be a join table between `Student` and `LessonPart` (called
`Completion`).

The usual restful-style actions for each of those resources should be supported.

Completing the next part of a lesson can be done by creating a Completion model/record. Validation can be
added there to check for the completion of all 'prior' parts.

### Considerations

#### Experience concerns at the start of this work

* short on using RSpec, first time using it for my own projects (have used MiniTest up till now)
* first time using Rails 5
* first time using the new API-style application
* first time dealing with the json-api spec
* first time writing an API to serve an EmberJS client

#### LessonPart

It may be overkill to model the `Completion` as a separate resource. The simpler solution would be to have an `integer`
column (values 1, 2, or 3 probably behind an enum) or three `boolean` columns on the `Lesson` resource that get set
as the lesson parts become completed. But:

1. I wanted to challenge myself to deal with a `has_many ... :through` relationship in RSpec, and
2. I like the `Completion` having a name and possibly some other attributes could be added if this were a real-world
   problem.

##### REST-ful controllers for many-to-many relations in an API world

The implementation of the many-to-many relationship (`Student` <-> `LessonPart`) does not follow the typical Rails
convention of using `accepts_nested_attributes_for` in the model and having the controller go through some jui-jitsu
to mutate the join table records. I don't want to overload the concept of 'updating a student' (or 'creating a
student') to also handle managing the `LessonPart` completions.

Given this is an API-only application it made sense to keep the API 'clean'. Separating out the association actions
into their own controllers was the solution. The routes model the concept of 'completing a lesson':

* `GET /students/101/completed_lesson_parts` - show all completions for student #101
* `POST /students/101/completed_lesson_parts` (providing a `lesson_part_id` in the post params) - complete a lesson
  part for student #101
* `GET /students/101/completed_lesson_parts/2` - at the moment, this returns the sames result as `/lesson_parts/2`,
  it's going to be low value, but it should 404 if the lesson part has not been completed by this student
* `DELETE /students/101/completed_lesson_parts/2` - un-complete the lesson part for the student

Should, one day, there be a need to work on the completions from the `LessonPart` side (e.g. in the context of a
`LessonPart` adding a `Student` completing it), the extra controller to do that (mimicking
`Students::StudentsCompletionsController`) would slot right into the design. For now, I'm sticking to a
`Student`-centric view of the actions.

### Learnings

#### RSpec

Perhaps unsurprisingly RSpec and Minitest are not fundamentally different in their capability or how they go about
doing their work. There is more that is similar than different. Obviously the syntax is different, and RSpec's DSL
does feel a little ... quirky at times. Aside from needing to lookup the RSpec API a bit to find the "right" bit of
the DSL to use, it felt much the same in terms of development efficiency.

#### Rails 5 and API-mode

It does not feel much different to Rails 4. The API mode is cool and `active_model_serializers` does a good job.

A few niggles setting up for a Heroku deploy are gone (no more `rails_12factor` gem,yay!).

#### json-api

It still feels a bit new and has some rough edges. Support in Rails is ... evolving and there's been a few issues to
workaround.

Having said that, it feels nice to have an opinionated specification covering the basic structure of the JSON
messages. [Bike sheds indeed](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Law_of_triviality)!

Commit message:

Added some more commentary after part 2 was done

README.md, after:

# students-education-api

A coding challenge to model students, teachers, lessons and students completing lessons in parts.

## The challenge

### Coding Project

_Company X_ is developing a new app for student education. Students complete lessons and their progress is recorded.
Each lesson has 3 parts - 1, 2 and 3. There are 100 lessons in total.

#### Part 1

Generate a rails app that persists students and their progress.

Define routes for:

1.  setting a student's progress - progress should consist of a lesson and part number.
2.  returning a JSON representation of a student and their associated progress.

See the results in [USAGE.md](USAGE.md#part-1)

#### Part 2

Teachers have classes containing number of students.

1.  Add a teacher model that is related to students
2.  Create a reports page for a teacher to view progress all of their students.

See the results in [USAGE.md](USAGE.md#part-2)

#### Part 3

Calculating progress

1. add a method for updating student progress - this should verify that the student is only able to complete the next
   part number in sequence e.g.
   L1 P1, L1 P2, L1 P3, L2 P1, L2 P2 etc

#### Seeing the results - curl

There is an instance of this application running at
[https://students-education-api.herokuapp.com](https://students-education-api.herokuapp.com).
For a demonstration of the basics of the API, see: [USAGE.md](USAGE.md)

## Environment

### Ruby

2.3.1

### Rails

5.0.0.rc1

## Installation

Clone the repository, then install the gems it depends on:

    cd students-education-api
    bundle install

## Setup

This application is configured to use a _PostgreSQL_ database, ensure you have one running, then create and seed the
database:

    bundle exec rails db:setup

## Operation

### Running the app

    bundle exec rails s

### Testing the app

    bundle exec rails test

## Interpretation of the problem

From the problem description, it would seem obvious to model resources / tables for:
* Student
* Teacher
* SchoolClass (don't want trouble conflicting with Ruby's Class class, so prefix with _School_)
* Lesson
* LessonPart

And some relationships:
* `Teacher` has many `SchoolClass`
* `SchoolClass` has many `Student`
* `SchoolClass` has many `Lesson` (100 of them)
* `Lesson` has many `LessonPart` (3 of them)
* `Student` has many `LessonPart` (through `Completion`)
* `LessonPart` has many `Student` (through `Completion`)

For now, to keep things simple, I am going to assume that a student is only enrolled in a single class. This is area
for enhancement later on: an `Enrolment` model to join `Student` and `SchoolClass` (`has_many ... through:`).

A possible enhancement is to being `Student` and `Teacher` closer with single-table-inheritance to DRY up the
models/schema. Whether it's worth doing that is somewhat debatable. It depends on how many common attributes and
much common behaviour the two models end up having.

To track student's progress there will be a join table between `Student` and `LessonPart` (called
`Completion`).

The usual restful-style actions for each of those resources should be supported.

Completing the next part of a lesson can be done by creating a Completion model/record. Validation can be
added there to check for the completion of all 'prior' parts.

### Considerations

#### Experience concerns at the start of this work

* short on using RSpec, first time using it for my own projects (have used MiniTest up till now)
* first time using Rails 5
* first time using the new API-style application
* first time dealing with the json-api spec
* first time writing an API to serve an EmberJS client

#### LessonPart

It may be overkill to model the `Completion` as a separate resource. The simpler solution would be to have an `integer`
column (values 1, 2, or 3 probably behind an enum) or three `boolean` columns on the `Lesson` resource that get set
as the lesson parts become completed. But:

1. I wanted to challenge myself to deal with a `has_many ... :through` relationship in RSpec, and
2. I like the `Completion` having a name and possibly some other attributes could be added if this were a real-world
   problem.

##### REST-ful controllers for many-to-many relations in an API world

The implementation of the many-to-many relationship (`Student` <-> `LessonPart`) does not follow the typical Rails
convention of using `accepts_nested_attributes_for` in the model and having the controller go through some jui-jitsu
to mutate the join table records. I don't want to overload the concept of 'updating a student' (or 'creating a
student') to also handle managing the `LessonPart` completions.

Given this is an API-only application it made sense to keep the API 'clean'. Separating out the association actions
into their own controllers was the solution. The routes model the concept of 'completing a lesson':

* `GET /students/101/completed_lesson_parts` - show all completions for student #101
* `POST /students/101/completed_lesson_parts` (providing a `lesson_part_id` in the post params) - complete a lesson
  part for student #101
* `GET /students/101/completed_lesson_parts/2` - at the moment, this returns the sames result as `/lesson_parts/2`,
  it's going to be low value, but it should 404 if the lesson part has not been completed by this student
* `DELETE /students/101/completed_lesson_parts/2` - un-complete the lesson part for the student

Should, one day, there be a need to work on the completions from the `LessonPart` side (e.g. in the context of a
`LessonPart` adding a `Student` completing it), the extra controller to do that (mimicking
`Students::StudentsCompletionsController`) would slot right into the design. For now, I'm sticking to a
`Student`-centric view of the actions.

### Learnings

#### RSpec

Perhaps unsurprisingly RSpec and Minitest are not fundamentally different in their capability or how they go about
doing their work. There is more that is similar than different. Obviously the syntax is different, and RSpec's DSL
does feel a little ... quirky at times. Aside from needing to lookup the RSpec API a bit to find the "right" bit of
the DSL to use, it felt much the same in terms of development efficiency.

#### Rails 5 and API-mode

It does not feel much different to Rails 4. The API mode is cool and helps in writing clean controllers.

A few niggles setting up for a Heroku deploy are gone (no more `rails_12factor` gem, yay!).

#### json-api

It still feels a bit new and has some rough edges. Support in Rails is ... evolving and there's been a few issues to
workaround.

Having said that, it feels nice to have an opinionated specification covering the basic structure of the JSON
messages. [Bike sheds indeed](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Law_of_triviality)!

##### After doing Part 2

I was a bit harsh. The `active-model-serializers` gem that implements the json-api spec is good. It lacks
documentation in few areas that makes it harder to work with than ideal. Once you work out the _right way_ to do
something, the solution drops out neatly.
